bpf token support (#15009)
canonical/lxd: doc/explanation/bpf.md

(bpf-delegation-token)=
# Privilege Delegation by BPF Token

## In general

> `security.delegate_bpf` option enables BPF functionality delegation mechanism (using BPF Token). If this setting is enabled then LXD mounts BPF filesystem inside a container instance with delegation configuration (depending on `security.delegate_bpf.*` settings).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {config:option}`instance-security:security.delegate_bpf` option enables the {abbr}`BPF (Berkeley Packet Filter)` functionality delegation mechanism, using a [BPF Token](https://docs.ebpf.io/linux/concepts/token). When enabled, LXD mounts a BPF File System (BPFFS) inside a container instance. This file system is configured with the `security.delegate_bpf.*` settings.
```

For example:

```
none on /sys/fs/bpf type bpf (rw,relatime,uid=1000000,gid=1000000,
                            delegate_cmds=map_create:prog_load,
                            delegate_maps=ringbuf,
                            delegate_progs=socket_filter,
                            delegate_attachs=cgroup_inet_ingress)
```

> Then, applications inside the container can create BPF Token file descriptor using that BPFFS mount and `bpf(BPF_TOKEN_CREATE)` syscall. Later, this token file descriptor can be passed to `bpf(BPF_PROG_LOAD)`, `bpf(BPF_MAP_CREATE)`, or another `bpf()`-command syscall and kernel will perform a permission check against the token instead of current user capabilities. To be more precise, current user caps are also checked for `CAP_BPF` but in a current user namespace when `bpf(BPF_TOKEN_CREATE)` is called.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, applications inside the container can create a BPFFS File Descriptor (FD) using that BPFFS mount and the `bpf(BPF_TOKEN_CREATE)` syscall. Later, this File Descriptor can be passed to `bpf(BPF_PROG_LOAD)`, `bpf(BPF_MAP_CREATE)`, or another `bpf()`-command syscall, and the kernel will perform a permission check against the token instead of the current user. An exception is that the kernel also checks for current user caps defined in `CAP_BPF`, in the current user namespace where `bpf(BPF_TOKEN_CREATE)` is called.
```

Reviewer: Would also need to add `FD` to .custom_wordlist.txt

> As it follows, user space applications inside the container must be aware of BPF Token kernel feature (appeared in Linux kernel v6.9) and make use of it. In contrast to `security.syscalls.intercept.*` features this one is not fully transparent and may require update or modification of the software inside the container. Fortunately, libbpf supports BPF tokens and if application uses libbpf then making use of this feature could be as simple

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It follows that user space applications inside the container must be aware of  the BPF Token kernel feature (which appeared in Linux kernel v6.9) and make use of it. In contrast to `security.syscalls.intercept.*` features, this one is not fully transparent and might require updates or modifications to the software inside the container. Fortunately, [the libbpf library]((https://docs.kernel.org/bpf/libbpf/libbpf_overview.html) supports BPF tokens. Thus if an application uses libbpf, then to make use of this feature, you might only need to update libbpf.
```

> as updating libbpf.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```{note}

> `security.delegate_bpf.cmd_types`, `security.delegate_bpf.map_types`, `security.delegate_bpf.prog_types`, `security.delegate_bpf.attach_types` need to be configured depending on BPF workload in the container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure the following instance options for the container, depending on its BPF workload:

- {config:option}`instance-security:security.delegate_bpf.cmd_types`
- {config:option}`instance-security:security.delegate_bpf.map_types`
- {config:option}`instance-security:security.delegate_bpf.prog_types`
- {config:option}`instance-security:security.delegate_bpf.attach_types` 
```

```

> Also see the [BPF Token documentation page](https://docs.ebpf.io/linux/concepts/token/) on `docs.ebpf.io` for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the [BPF Token documentation page](https://docs.ebpf.io/linux/concepts/token/) on `docs.ebpf.io` for details.
```

## Example (socket filter)

> Let's consider an example with socket filter program from [libbpf-bootstrap](https://github.com/libbpf/libbpf-bootstrap).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's consider an example with a socket filter program from [libbpf-bootstrap](https://github.com/libbpf/libbpf-bootstrap).
```

> Create an unprivileged container instance and set all the necessary configuration options to enable BPF delegation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following creates an unprivileged container instance and sets all the necessary configuration options to enable BPF delegation:
```

```{terminal}
lxc launch ubuntu:noble bpf-experiments
lxc config set bpf-experiments limits.kernel.memlock=unlimited
lxc config set bpf-experiments security.delegate_bpf=true
lxc config set bpf-experiments security.delegate_bpf.prog_types=socket_filter
lxc config set bpf-experiments security.delegate_bpf.attach_types=cgroup_inet_ingress
lxc config set bpf-experiments security.delegate_bpf.cmd_types=prog_load:map_create
lxc config set bpf-experiments security.delegate_bpf.map_types=ringbuf
```

> Clone and build an example code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following set of commands clones and builds the libbpf-bootstrap.git repository within the example `bpf-experiments` container:
```

```{terminal}
lxc shell bpf-experiments
apt install clang build-essential
git clone https://github.com/libbpf/libbpf-bootstrap.git
git submodule update --init --recursive
cd libbpf-bootstrap/examples/c
make
```

> Now, everything is ready for an experiment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This experiment completes by running commands from two different shells into the `bpf-experiments` container.
```

From one terminal:

```{terminal}
lxc shell bpf-experiments
./sockfilter
```

From another terminal:

```{terminal}
lxc shell bpf-experiments
ping -c 4 localhost
```

> If everything works like intended then you'll see something like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sample output:
```

```
ibbpf: loading object 'sockfilter_bpf' from buffer
libbpf: elf: section(2) .symtab, size 192, link 1, flags 0, type=2
libbpf: elf: section(3) socket, size 576, link 0, flags 6, type=1
libbpf: sec 'socket': found program 'socket_handler' at insn offset 0 (0 bytes), code size 72 insns (576 bytes)
...
libbpf: Kernel doesn't support BTF, skipping uploading it.
libbpf: map 'rb': created successfully, fd=3
interface: lo        protocol: ICMP        127.0.0.1:2048(src) -> 127.0.0.1:32429(dst)
interface: lo        protocol: ICMP        127.0.0.1:0(src) -> 127.0.0.1:34477(dst)
interface: lo        protocol: ICMP        127.0.0.1:2048(src) -> 127.0.0.1:46163(dst)
interface: lo        protocol: ICMP        127.0.0.1:0(src) -> 127.0.0.1:48211(dst)
```

> As we can see from this output our ICMP packets were captured by eBPF program and logged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can see from this sample output that the ICMP packets were captured by the {abbr}`eBPF (extended Berkeley Capture Filter)` program and logged.
```

## Finding the right configuration

> To figure out the right values for `security.delegate_bpf.cmd_types`, `security.delegate_bpf.map_types`, `security.delegate_bpf.prog_types`, `security.delegate_bpf.attach_types` options you need to know how your application inside the container uses eBPF (which program types, map types, etc.) You can always consult with the source code or use [`strace`](https://github.com/strace/strace) tool to trace `bpf` syscall and see how it is being used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To figure out the right values for the `security.delegate_bpf.cmd_types`, `security.delegate_bpf.map_types`, `security.delegate_bpf.prog_types`, `security.delegate_bpf.attach_types` options, you must know how your application inside the container uses eBPF, such as its program types and map types. You can consult the application's source code, or use the [`strace`](https://github.com/strace/strace) tool to trace `bpf` syscall and see how it is being used.
```

> Invocation can be like `strace -e bpf ./sockfilter`:

Reviewer: ````suggestion
Example using `strace`:

 ```{terminal}
strace -e bpf ./sockfilter
```
````

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sample output:

```

bpf(BPF_MAP_CREATE, {map_type=BPF_MAP_TYPE_RINGBUF, key_size=0, value_size=0, max_entries=262144, map_flags=0x10000 /* BPF_F_??? */, inner_map_fd=0, map_name="", map_ifindex=0, btf_fd=0, btf_key_type_id=0, btf_value_type_id=0, btf_vmlinux_value_type_id=0, map_extra=0, ...}, 80) = 4
libbpf: map 'rb': created successfully, fd=3
bpf(BPF_PROG_LOAD, {prog_type=BPF_PROG_TYPE_SOCKET_FILTER, insn_cnt=72, insns=0x56198b83c180, license="Dual BSD/GPL", log_level=0, log_size=0, log_buf=NULL, kern_version=KERNEL_VERSION(6, 12, 14), prog_flags=0x10000 /* BPF_F_??? */, prog_name="", prog_ifindex=0, expected_attach_type=BPF_CGROUP_INET_INGRESS, prog_btf_fd=0, func_info_rec_size=0, func_info=NULL, func_info_cnt=0, line_info_rec_size=0, line_info=NULL, line_info_cnt=0, attach_btf_id=0, attach_prog_fd=0, fd_array=NULL, ...}, 152) = 4
bpf(BPF_OBJ_GET_INFO_BY_FD, {info={bpf_fd=3, info_len=88, info=0x7fffafdf5de0}}, 16) = 0
```

> From this log we can see that our `sockfilter` is using:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This log shows that `sockfilter` is using:
```

For example:

```
none on /sys/fs/bpf type bpf (rw,relatime,uid=1000000,gid=1000000,
                            delegate_cmds=map_create:prog_load,
                            delegate_maps=ringbuf,
                            delegate_progs=socket_filter,
                            delegate_attachs=cgroup_inet_ingress)
```

Then, applications inside the container can create a BPF Token file descriptor using that BPFFS mount and the `bpf(BPF_TOKEN_CREATE)` syscall. Later, this File Descriptor can be passed to `bpf(BPF_PROG_LOAD)`, `bpf(BPF_MAP_CREATE)`, or another `bpf()`-command syscall, and the kernel will perform a permission check against the token instead of the current user credentials. To be more precise, current user caps are also checked for `CAP_BPF` but in a current user namespace when `bpf(BPF_TOKEN_CREATE)` is called.

> It follows that user space applications inside the container must be aware of  the BPF Token kernel feature (which appeared in Linux kernel v6.9) and make use of it. In contrast to `security.syscalls.intercept.*` features, this one is not fully transparent and might require updates or modifications to the software inside the container. Fortunately, [the libbpf library]((https://docs.kernel.org/bpf/libbpf/libbpf_overview.html) supports BPF tokens. Thus if an application uses libbpf, then to make use of this feature, you might only need to update libbpf.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It follows that user space applications inside the container must be aware of  the BPF Token kernel feature (which appeared in Linux kernel v6.9) and make use of it. In contrast to `security.syscalls.intercept.*` features, this one is not fully transparent and might require updates or modifications to the software inside the container. Fortunately, [the libbpf library](https://docs.kernel.org/bpf/libbpf/libbpf_overview.html) supports BPF tokens. Thus if an application uses libbpf, then to make use of this feature, you might only need to update libbpf.
```

> as updating libbpf.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
